Blind date: ‘I wish it had been on a Friday: I’d have liked more cocktails’
Christmas music is inescapable this time of year, making it impossible to hold a neutral opinion about the genre. But what causes people to fall into one camp or the other?
Here, two writers flesh out the very personal reasons that the same annual din makes one desolate and the other merry.
I hate Christmas music in public. In New York, I can’t go to the deli to get a soda, drink a cup of coffee in a diner, buy a pack of condoms in a drugstore, hear a radio station in the dentist’s office or even walk down the street without being bombarded with a stream of insipid bromides and jingles about how happy I should be.
My reasons for hating unsolicited Christmas music are pretty personal. The holiday has stopped being enjoyable since my dad, mom and stepmother all died in my twenties; indeed, the whole season has become unbearable since one of my sisters died halfway through my thirties. Already blue in my thoughts from Thanksgiving to New Year’s, Christmas music invades my melancholy and makes it worse, forcing me to think about happy Christmases past never to be repeated, and to feel like a failure as a single adult without children.
I know I’m not alone in these thoughts, though. Who among us wants to hear reminders of the good time you’re supposed to be having at home, at work, in the store and on the radio, every incessant second?
As a Christian, I usually celebrate the holiday in some form. I’ve sung in many gospel choir concerts and know most of the Christmas standards by heart. I’ve hosted many a party where I’ve donned a Santa hat and played Christmas songs all night long. But I can turn this music on or off. When I am walking down the street or want to buy a toothbrush, I don’t want to be forced repeatedly to pine for a reality, a family or a set of experiences which are not available to me — and which should not be foisted on anyone.
What I resent most about Christmas music is that it’s used as a blatant tool of social control to make us long for families that may be broken or deceased, and to desire consumer goods we don’t want and can’t afford. It’s also theocratic, and its omnipresence in the commons disrespects people who aren’t Christians. It even robs Christians of the chance to appreciate Christmas music as something special, and of the chance to just be with the quiet of the season.
The trick to liking Christmas music is finding the right Christmas music to like.
Obvious, yes, but not so easy to do, given the amount of garbage there is to sift through. Starting around Halloween, that’s all that plays in continuous rotation at the mall, Starbucks, Bill O’Reilly’s dressing room, even the quick-change oil place down the street, for some reason. It’s inescapable. It’s no wonder people hate Christmas music.
But just as the spirit of Christmas exists apart from the annual orgy of consumerism that overtakes us like a bloodlust, the spirit of Christmas music isn’t to be found in yet another version of Winter Wonderland or the kind-of-rape-y Baby, It’s Cold Outside.
There’s plenty to love about Christmas music that doesn’t involve hoary standards worn thinner than Grandpa’s holiday tie, though even standards done well have a certain charm: Emmylou Harris singing The First Noel is spellbinding no matter how many times I hear it, and Paul Westerberg’s ramshackle version of Away in a Manger is perfect in its half-assed glory.
Apart from those, the Christmas songs I love fall into two categories. First, subversive novelty tunes that spoof the ridiculous parts of the holiday season: Monty Python’s Christmas in Heaven, or Nick Lowe’s Christmas at the Airport, or Big Freedia’s over-the-top new Christmas jam Make It Jingle, a paean to ostentatious gifts and lewd dance moves. Come to think of it, that one’s probably not satirical, but it’s fun in a way that Santa Baby hasn’t been since 1953.
Then there are the poignant, heart-on-sleeve songs, because who doesn’t like to wallow a bit every now and then? The Pogues’ Fairytale of New York, Jesse Malin’s Xmas and John Prine’s Christmas in Prison, to name a few, see past the tinsel and lights to the bittersweet side of the Christmas season. Tidings of joy are often undercut by darker themes: financial instability, hunger, more keenly missing absent loved ones. The sad-bastard songs remind me to be grateful for my own good fortune.
Christmas music also reminds me of my mom, who died two days before Christmas in 2002. She loved the holiday season, and I can’t remember a year when Harris’ Light of the Stable album wasn’t playing while she baked cookies and we decorated the tree. Even in leaner years, she never let on to us kids, or let it dim her enthusiasm. And she would have loved that Nick Lowe song.
Time is a boomerang, not an arrow. I was adopted by Pentecostals and stamped “Missionary”. Christmas was important in the missionary calendar. From the beginning of November, either we were preparing packages to send to the Foreign Field or we were preparing packages to deliver to those in Hot Places returning to the Home Front.
It might have been because my parents had been in the second world war. It might have been because we lived in End Time, waiting for Armageddon. Whatever the reason, there was a drill to Christmas, from making the mincemeat for the mince pies to singing carols to, or rather at, the unsaved of Accrington. Still, Mrs Winterson loved Christmas. It was the one time of the year when she went out into the world looking as though the world was more than a vale of tears.
She was an unhappy woman, and so this happy time in our house was precious. I am sure I love Christmas because she did.
On 21 December every year, my mother went out in her hat and coat while my father and I strung up the paper chains, made by me, from the corners of the parlour cornice to the centre light fitting.
Eventually my mother returned, in what seemed to be a hailstorm, though maybe that was her personal weather. She carried a goose, half-in, half-out of her shopping bag, its slack head hung sideways like a dream nobody can remember. She passed it to me – goose and dream – and I plucked the feathers into a bucket. We kept the feathers to restuff whatever needed restuffing, and we saved the thick goose fat drained from the bird for roasting potatoes through the winter. Apart from Mrs W, who had a thyroid problem, everyone we knew was as thin as a ferret. We needed goose fat.
After I had left home, and later gone to university at Oxford, I went back to the old house, that first Christmas-time. My mother had given me the ultimatum to leave home long since, when I fell in love with a girl, and in a religious house like ours I might as well have married a goat. We hadn’t spoken since. I had lived in a Mini for a bit, lodged with a teacher and eventually left town. During my first term at Oxford I received a postcard – one of those postcards that says post card in blue letters at the top. Underneath, in her immaculate copperplate handwriting was the message: “Are you coming home this Christmas? Love Mother”.
As I reached our little terrace house at the top of the street, I could hear the mostly musical sounds of what is best described as a bossa nova version of “In the Bleak Midwinter”. My mother had thrown out the old upright piano and got herself an electronic organ with double keyboard, orchestra stops, drum and bass.
She hadn’t seen me for two years. Nothing was said. We spent the next hour admiring the effects of snare drum and trumpet solo on “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing”.
My Oxford friend from St Lucia was due to visit me at home, which was brave of her, but when I had tried to explain about my family she thought I was exaggerating. At first the visit was a great success. Mrs W considered a black friend as a missionary endeavour all of its own. She went round to the retired missionaries from the church and asked: “What do they eat?” Pineapples, came the answer.
When Vicky arrived my mother gave her a wool blanket she had knitted so that Vicky would not be cold. “They feel the cold,” she told me.
Mrs Winterson was an obsessive and she had been knitting for Jesus all year. The Christmas tree had knitted decorations on it, and the dog was imprisoned inside a Christmas coat of red wool with white snowflakes. There was a knitted nativity scene, and the shepherds were wearing little scarves because this was Bethlehem on the bus route to Accrington.
My dad opened the door dressed in a knitted waistcoat and matching knitted tie. The whole house had been re-knitted.
Mrs W was in a merry mood. “Would you like some gammon and pineapple, Vicky? Cheese on toast with pineapple? Pineapples and cream? Pineapple upside-down cake? Pineapple fritters?” Eventually, after a few days of this fare, Vicky said: “I don’t like pineapple.”
Mrs W’s mood changed at once. She didn’t speak to us for the rest of the day and she crushed up a papier-mache robin. The next morning, at breakfast, the table was set with a pyramid of unopened tins of pineapple chunks and a Victorian postcard of two cats on their hind legs dressed up like Mr and Mrs. The caption said “Nobody loves us”.
That night, when Vicky went to bed, she found that her pillow had been removed and the pillowcase stuffed with warning leaflets about the Apocalypse. She wondered whether to go home, but I’d seen worse and I thought things might improve.
On Christmas Eve we had a group of carol singers round from the church. Mrs W did seem happier. She had forced me and Vicky to wrap several half-cabbages in tinfoil and spear them with cocktail sticks of cheddar cheese, topped with the rejected pineapple chunks.
She called these things sputniks. It was something to do with the cold war. Tinfoil? Antennae? The scaremongering that the KGB had listening devices hidden in cheese?
Never mind. The offending pineapples had found a purpose and we were all singing carols quite happily when there was a knock at the door. It turned out to be the Salvation Army, singing carols too.
This was reasonable. It was Christmas. But Mrs Winterson was having none of it. She opened the front door and shouted: “Jesus is here. Go away.”
When I went away after that Christmas I never went back. I never saw Mrs W again – she was soon too furious about my debut novel, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit (1985). Quote: “It’s the first time I’ve had to order a book in a false name.”
As you get older you remember the dead at Christmas. The Celts, during their festival of Samhain, expected the dead to join the living. Many cultures would understand that; not ours.
That is a pity. And a loss. If time is a boomerang and not an arrow, then the past is always returning and repeating. Memory, as a creative act, allows us to reawaken the dead, or sometimes to lay them to rest, as at last we understand our past.
Last Christmas I was alone in my kitchen, the fire lit – I love having a fire in the kitchen. I was pouring myself a drink when Judy Garland came on the radio singing “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas”. I remembered how Mrs W had played that song on the piano. It was one of those moments we all know, of sadness and sweetness mixed together. Regret? Yes, I think so, for everything we got wrong. But recognition too, because she was a remarkable woman. She deserved a miracle to get her out of her trapped life of no hope, no money, no possibility of change.
Fortunately, she got the miracle. Unfortunately, the miracle was me. I was the golden ticket. I could have taken her anywhere. She could have been free ...
The Christmas story of the Christ Child is complex. Here’s what it tell us about miracles.
Miracles are never convenient (the baby’s going to be born whether or not there’s a hotel room – and there isn’t).
Miracles are not what we expect (an obscure man and woman find themselves parenting the Saviour of the World).
Miracles detonate the existing situation – and the blow-up and the back-blast mean some people get hurt.
What is a miracle? A miracle is an intervention – it breaks through the space-time continuum. A miracle is an intervention that cannot be accounted for purely rationally. Chance and fate are in the mix. A miracle is a benign intervention, yes, but miracles are like the genie in the bottle – let them out and there’s a riot. You’ll get your three wishes, but a whole lot else besides.
Mrs W wanted a baby. She couldn’t have one. Along comes me – but as she often said, “The Devil led us to the wrong crib.” Satan as a faulty star.
Sometimes the thing we long for, the thing we need, the miracle we want, is right there in front of us, and we can’t see it, or we run the other way; or, saddest of all, we just don’t know what to do with it. Think how many people get the success they want, the partner they want, the money they want, and turn it into dust and ashes – like the fairy gold no one can spend.
So at this time of year I think about the Christmas story, and all the Christmas stories since. As a writer I know that we get along badly without space in our lives for imagination and reflection. Religious festivals were designed to be time outside of time. Time where ordinary time was subject to significant time. What we remember. What we invent.
• Christmas Days: 12 Stories and 12 Feasts for 12 Days by Jeanette Winterson is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £11.25 (RRP £14.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
The sights and sounds of Christmas in the capital reflect the place itself - an extraordinary montage of tradition and change, glamour, pathos, enterprise, curiosity, possibility, poignance and generosity. I asked student film maker Max Curwen-Bingley to collect some seasonal scenes from the city, concentrating on variety and musicality. Here’s what he found.
From Good King Wenceslas on Oxford Street to Oh Come All Ye Faithful in Trafalgar Square, with room for reggae at Oxford Circus too. That’s the spirit. Merry Christmas from London to readers everywhere.